Hello, welcome everyone.
Thank you very much for being here today.
Hope you're enjoying WWDC this year
with all the really exciting things
that Jaguar brings and possibilities
that Jaguar brings to you.
We're particularly happy
today because right here,
right now, is the first time,
first showing of Apple's implementation
of hardware programmability.
The OpenGL team has done a great
job in providing support for the
mainstream programmable graphics
cards currently in the market,
but they have done a lot more than that.
What you see today is a set of
tools to allow you to preview,
debug and optimize your
shader code in real time.
These tools are available currently
right now on your Jaguar seating CD and
we hope that this will become a staple
for you for hardware programming,
certainly on the Apple platform,
even perhaps on any other platform
you wish to deploy your application.
We are very excited about
this first coming out and
to welcome to the stage Mr.
OpenGL Engineer Geoff Staahl.
We're going to talk about graphics
programmability today across
the spectrum from both vertex
programming and pixel programming.
First, just an interesting show of hands,
who's actually written a vertex
program or tried to even look at one?
and more than I thought, maybe 20,
maybe 20 out of the audience.
So what I'm going to try and
do is I'm going to try and
give you a good introduction
to what vertex programming is,
what pixel programming is,
so you can go out and use the tools and
experiment and put these new features
into your applications and actually take
advantage of the power that we have.
So I'm Geoff Stahl.
Myself and James McComb will
be doing the session today.
I'll talk you through a little bit
about graphics programmability.
Then James will take you through a
tutorial and I'll finish up at the end.
What we're going to cover is,
first we're going to cover
a little bit of evolution of
programmability in the graphics space.
About 20 years ago,
Cook wrote a paper called Shade Trees.
And that's kind of when everyone
started thinking about programmability.
It followed on, and I'll go into details
in a few minutes,
but we ended up where we are today
with commercial graphics processing
units on your desktop that can handle
the programmability and do amazing
things like we saw at the beginning.
So, then we'll cover what is
graphics programmability.
Then vertex programming.
Finally, we'll go to James and the Shader
Builder tutorial and finish
up with the fragment shading.
So first,
let's talk about a little history here.
1984,
and this is the same time frame when
people were writing papers on how
to blend two objects on the screen.
If you came from the
accelerated Windows Server,
the same date,
same year as that paper about blending.
Cook wrote the paper on shade trees,
which described a hierarchical
shading language or a shading setup
that allowed you to put multiple
programmable shaders onto different
objects and really set the groundwork
in place for programs like RenderMan.
Two years later,
Pixar brings out RenderMan,
which still today is the kind of
benchmark by which all of their shaders
or shading languages are measured.
Moving on, 20 years later almost,
or 17 years later, Nvidia demonstrates,
brings out the GeForce 3 and
demonstrates the Chameleon demo you saw.
And more recently this year,
they demonstrated the Werewolf demo,
which shows really desktop shading,
desktop programmability really
that is fully programmable
and you can fully utilize.
Up to this point we had
some configurability,
but really didn't have
that programmability.
So now it's on your desktop,
now you can buy a GeForce 4 Titanium,
get an ATI Radeon 8500,
and you get that programmability
onto your desktop.
So where are we going from here?
What's the future look like?
Well, this project is like the
Stanford shader language.
What that is,
is trying to take a render man type
of language and bring it down to
the desktop being fully accelerated.
Up to this point, when you,
companies that would implement
things like render man,
what they would do is have a
server farm out in the back that
would just churn away at frames.
And so when, you know,
Pixar or film company,
what they would do is they,
when you're not using your machine,
they grab it and they use
it as a rendering engine.
Well now, your desktop can be your
own rendering engine.
You can do what you did 20
years ago that took a cray,
days to do in real time on the desktop.
I mentioned Doom 3 here also.
Why Doom 3?
I think you'll be surprised
in a few weeks when id shows
it at E3 and then later in,
whenever they release that,
that you'll see that it really requires
that programmable GPU on your desktop
to get that good immersive performance.
Up till now, games had, you know,
you can add on this feature,
add on that feature.
You need a little more fill rate.
But this would be the first thing that
really requires mass market graphics
programmability in the desktop to run it.
So we saw the chameleon originally.
Why is the chameleon important?
Well that was one of the first
demos for the GeForce 3 and
what it shows is a couple of
different areas of programmability.
When you look at it at first
it looks cool and you think
wow that's pretty neat,
look at those effects.
What are they really doing there?
One thing they're doing
is a skinned mesh.
All the vertices for the chameleon
are passive static vertices.
It has no movement per se.
They're not manipulating a vertices
sending it to the graphics card.
They're actually sending one
about 4 meg chunk of static data.
Then they use a set of bones and
vertex programs to actually manipulate
that static data and they use a
weighting structure to kind of stretch
the vertices across the bones.
And that's only available
through using a vertex program.
It's also bump mapped as you saw.
That bump mapping,
that per pixel bump mapping
requires a combination of vertex
programs and pixel shaders.
It has gloss mapping,
so you have multi pass.
It has that shininess on it.
Also it has a cubic environment map.
You may have seen the reflective one.
It uses a cubic environment
map and the chameleon itself to
reflect the environment around it.
Further, it has a glass version
that has glass in it.
And if you also notice carefully,
and you look and see the leaf
in the back of this picture,
you can see that the fogging,
it's a very nice fogging.
Things are fading out to the horizon.
They're not just turning
a different color.
That's done again through a vertex
program by manipulating the fog color.
James will show you that later,
how you can actually manipulate the
alpha value as a way of fogging objects.
So for all those of you who have
never looked at a vertex program,
what is programmability?
What is the difference between a
traditional graphics pipeline and
the programmable graphics pipeline?
Transcription by Captioning &
Subtitling @Captioning.com.au So if
you're writing a vertex program,
you need to understand that.
You're taking world coordinates,
world information,
and you're transforming that into
something that the rest of the pipeline,
the rasterization step,
can then use to actually light
or color and draw those pixels.
Texture and Fragment Shader,
on the other hand,
takes that information in,
has been clipped,
has those pixels all stacked up there,
and then does both texture
coordinate address generation,
which means where in the texture map that
you've supplied is that pixel located,
and then also does the
combination of multi-texturing.
So as you saw, like for example,
the bump map gloss map,
that is a function that requires multiple
textures to be combined onto each other
to get the shininess in one texture,
the bumpiness from another texture,
and the base color from
even a third texture.
So where are we now?
Mac OS X Jaguar,
the seed that you all have,
The target is, let me back up,
Mac OS X Jaguar.
The target for that
is our vertex program.
It's a spec that takes both ATI,
NVIDIA and any other vendor's
hardware into account and gives a one
unified spec that you can write to.
You don't have to write
to something for ATI,
something for NVIDIA,
something for Matrox and
something for 3D Labs.
This brings everything together
to give you one environment to
write your vertex programs in.
From the texture shader side,
we're not as lucky.
Really, the hardware is still different
enough that there's not a unified
specification for these things.
So what we've done,
we've taken the best vendor
specs on both sides and
implemented those in the Jaguar.
And these are all in your seed.
So we have texture shader 1, 2,
and 3 from NVIDIA, which is new.
We still have register combiners 1 and 2,
which were there from the 10.1.
And in ATI, we're looking to put
fragment shader into Jaguar.
It is not in your seed currently,
but it looks like that's going
to come along for Jaguar,
and that'll be there as a more
unified for the ATI hardware
way to do fragment shading.
So, what's the hardware support?
What hardware do you need?
Well, the bad news is,
to get the full hardware
support you need a GeForce 3,
GeForce 4, or ATI-RADI-8500.
We can expect that.
That's when the shadings come along,
in the past year, year and a half.
But the good news is,
is we have an optimized software
solution for vertex programs.
So all you guys out there with a laptop,
any laptop, don't care what it is,
you can pop up the shader builder that
James is going to show you later and be
sitting outside after the presentation,
not during the presentation,
after the presentation,
and start building shaders.
You don't need a GeForce 3, GeForce 4,
or ATI-RADI-8500 Radeon.
You can just do it on
any machine you want,
anytime you want.
You can be on the plane flight
back home and fooling around
with that vertex shader stuff,
experimenting and building cool
shaders for your next project.
So our vertex program,
this is new for Jaguar.
As I said, it's a target for Jaguar.
It's currently with
the arb working group,
means it's not a finished spec.
So what we did was for Jaguar,
we took a snapshot of that.
And that's what you see actually
represented in Shader Builder.
It's not quite what the
arb working spec will be,
there are some syntactic differences.
But the functionality
is almost 100% there.
The reason we did this is we wanted
to get you something today that you
could work with and then change the
commas and the spacing tomorrow.
We'll be fully compliant with
the spec when it comes out.
There are 84 issues currently
that were brought up.
76 are completely resolved.
There are 8 unresolved.
We feel real confident that
in the next couple of weeks,
those will be completely resolved.
And you'll have a spec
that you can work with.
If you're interested,
once the spec comes out,
like all other specs,
it will be at the OpenGL.org and
you can download it and see how
it's coming and track it there.
And as I said,
Shader Builder will be updated
in the final Jaguar edition.
edition to be updated with
whatever the spec turns out to be.
[Transcript missing]
So why do you want to use vertex program?
Why is it important to
you to learn about this?
Why do you want to use it?
Well first thing, as we've talked about,
one thing we're trying to do is
transfer as much load from your programs
onto the graphics processing unit.
GeForce 4 Titanium has
63 million transistors.
The PowerPC has about
10 million transistors.
There's a lot of effort,
a lot of specified hardware,
specific hardware designed to do this
kind of operation in that graphics card.
So why don't you let
it do that operation?
Instead of trying to take the fixed
function pipeline and do a whole bunch
of manipulations and kind of squeegee
your data around and do some strange
things to actually make it fit in,
just write the vertex program that
explicitly does and efficiently
does what you need it to do.
That gets to the idea of efficiency.
Some things it can do very well is
handle non-standard lighting models.
Don't like gross shading.
I want a phong shaded model.
Well you can write a phong shaded model,
put it in your vertex
program and there you go.
Everything in your scene
will be phong shaded.
Appropriate information down and
James will again show you something very
similar to that in his demonstrations
and I think you'll be pretty impressed.
It's also going to do skinning.
We saw the skinning part of it.
We saw that the chameleon used
skinning to manipulate the vertices.
Passed static data down to
the GPU so it never had,
every frame it's not sending down 40,
50,000 vertices.
It passed it down once, put it in,
used a vertex array range and then
uses the bone structure inside a vertex
program to manipulate that on the GPU.
Very efficient.
Okay.
The last thing that we
can really do with it is,
one of the things you can really do
with it is parametric vertex control.
If I want to displace every vertex by
a certain amount from a certain point,
I can pass that information into a
vertex program and it can do that.
So I can do a standard transformation,
standard lighting,
and then do some kind of
displacement based on some kind
of action inside your application.
Let's talk about the computation model.
It's a vector engine.
Every component of that
is a vector operation.
There are four components, 32 bits each.
It works on a single vertex.
Think of it as a black box that
every single vertex that you pass
to the GPU is passing through.
No vertex prim- no- no
vertex generation is allowed.
You can't take one
vertex and generate two.
And you can't put in three
vertices or triangles or quads or
whatever other primitives you want.
It's a single vertex operation.
It's also a state machine.
Your application sets the inputs,
passes the vertex down,
it operates on that vertex.
There's no interdependence.
I can't take the output of-
of the vertex program and feed
it back into the next vertex.
That has to be handled
by the application.
Think about- if you want to
think about it in a simple way,
think about it as every vertex
program works in parallel.
If you think about it that way,
you realize that there's no way that one
vertex program can affect the next one.
There's no branching.
It's a simple computational model.
You can do an evaluate and select.
The output data required by the current
rasterization model is required to
be output by the vertex program.
So if you have two texture
coordinates turned on- two
texture- two texture units enabled,
you must pass that.
You can pass texture coordinates
down for two texture units or you're
going to have an undefined operation.
The- the implementation is free to
generate random texture coordinates
or use zeros or whatever.
So understand what your state
is and understand what you need
to actually pass out of that.
So what's the input for vertex programs?
Well first you have conventional input.
The conventional input is things
you're used to seeing in OpenGL.
Things like position, the normal,
color fog, and a vertex weight.
Also you have texture coordinates.
For all your texture units you
can pass down texture coordinates.
And lastly you can pass
material properties.
Not normally done in OpenGL as
a per vertex operation,
but in the RVertex spec it does allow
you to do per vertex material properties.
But you can think of it in a
totally different way if you like.
You can think of those as just
a set of generic attributes.
You can have a lookup table
of vertices and you pass an
index in and pass a vertex out.
If you wanted to do that you could.
There's no limitation that you have
to conform to a standard OpenGL model.
That's one of the beauties
of the vertex program.
You can think kind of outside the
fixed pipeline or outside the box
that defines and do whatever you want.
As efficiently or as
inefficiently as you'd like.
The maximum number of attributes,
because there's kind of a different
combination of things you can do here,
are defined in the spec,
max vertex attributes arb,
and the spec defines that
there is 16 minimums,
so you're guaranteed that
you have 16 attributes.
and lastly, the read-only.
Also, the other half of the input
is program parameters.
These are kind of things that
would be outside of a begin end.
So this is like parametric data that
you might define for an entire object,
like a displacement.
Or if you want to enlarge an object,
how much are you going
to enlarge that object?
Or a point to revolve the object around,
some kind of manipulation thing that
you would do for an entire object,
not per vertex.
They can either be OpenGL state,
as there's a lot of
state defined for these,
or they can be user data.
User data can either be local
to that program or it can work
across a number of programs.
And that's defined inside the
spec and when it comes out,
I think you should look at it.
They're very well defined
in how this works.
In this case you have a lot of these.
You have 96 minimum, the spec defines,
again it's queryable and
implementation dependent.
Again, inputs read only.
You can't read and write the inputs,
you can't feed back into
the next vertex program.
Here's some examples
of what it looks like.
I just wanted to put this up not
specifically to make any sense,
but to give you a feel of
what it's going to look like.
It's very assembly language looking.
At the top you have a vertex position.
Very simple.
You have a normal.
You have some shininess
or material properties.
Some diffuse in the specular.
Then the bottom part you
have some parameters.
Things like the model view matrix.
You're going to take the inverse
transpose of whatever the model
view matrix was when you submitted
the vertex and you're going
to have that in your program.
Obviously this is real critical
for that transformation.
You can't really transform things
from your world space to the
viewport unless you're going
to have the model view matrix.
Then also you can get the model
view projection matrix for example.
That's without the inverse.
You're just taking it directly.
There's lighting state.
And then there's program environment
variables down there just enumerated.
So you can pass your parameters
just in program environment
variables directly in.
And lastly you can use
parameters for constants.
So, now that you have the inputs,
what are you operating on when you're
actually running your vertex program?
They're program locals or temporaries.
There are four components, 32 bits each,
very symmetrical across the
whole vertex program engine.
And you have to declare them explicitly.
You see an example of
one at the bottom there?
That's a normal temp,
a dot product maybe,
or temporary color storage.
They're both read and write,
so you can store-- they're a
scratch space for you to work with.
Defines as 12 minimum, and they're also
implementation dependent.
If the implementation can support more,
they'll advertise how many
they can support to you.
Output is a lot simpler.
We've seen like sixteen attributes,
ninety-six parameters,
twelve local variables.
Output is pretty defined.
Output has the outputs I list there.
Positioning clip coordinates,
required output.
Doesn't make sense to spit a vertex out
unless you have a vertex to spit out.
You have to put a vertex out there
with actual coordinates there.
Color front, back, primary, secondary.
So you can do the back secondary
color or the front primary color.
You can output all four of those options.
A fog coordinate.
Point size and texture coordinates
for however many texture units
you have or have enabled if you
want to think of it that way.
Because if you haven't enabled it,
it makes no sense to output
a texture coordinate.
Again, this is why I stated before,
understand your rasterization model,
understand the texture
coordinates enabled,
understand what you're
doing with it later,
whether you have fog
turned on or not turned on,
and make sure you put out
all the outputs you need.
These are write only.
You write to them, they pass out,
and there you go.
So an example of these
are result position,
result color, color back secondary,
result fog.
Pretty simple.
I mean this is really
simple stuff to read.
It's pretty readable.
You can look through the vertex program
and since it is not a looping flow,
it's not a branching flow,
everything is declared explicitly,
you can read through it and
really tell what it's going to do.
Let's look at the instruction set.
The instruction set,
as you may have guessed with my
inference to assembly language,
it is basically an assembly
language instruction set.
But it is graphically oriented.
It's a limited subset of instructions.
Not that many.
It's not 100 instructions.
It's more like 25 instructions.
You also have special
properties you can do.
You can do a source swizzle in the gate.
So you can take four component vector.
You can take x, y, z and w.
And I want to use x,
y in the opposite order in my multiply.
So I can do y.x, z, w.
And when the multiply happens,
it will swap those two and use
that in its final determination
of the result there.
You also can do a write mass.
You can say I only want
to write the w coordinate.
For example, it's really good in fog.
If you are, for alpha values.
If you want to write your position with
one set of operations and then write
your w or alpha value with another set,
you can mask off the w.
And then you can write your w.
you can just write to the w.
Minimum defined in the spec
is going to be 128 operations.
But implementations again are
free to implement more than this.
You can query that.
Most instructions are single operation.
The spec does note that
some may be compound.
For example,
the cross product instruction could be
two instructions substituted in there.
And that's noted in the spec.
And again, when it comes out,
I think you should look clearly
at that when you're implementing
your program if you're getting
near that instruction limit.
So let's look at the
instruction set a little bit.
Just kind of looking through it,
you have an address register load,
you have some arithmetic instructions.
Things you see that are graphically
oriented are dot product,
dot product 3,
dot product 4 and the cross product.
You have some min/maxes.
The set less than and set
greater than you can use for
the branching and selection.
And then there's a whole bunch
of math instructions at the end.
So it's a graphically
oriented assembly language.
This is it.
This is all that's defined in
the current ARB spec as existing.
So there's not a page and a
page of instructions to learn.
It's pretty simple.
So now I'm going to take you through
an arb-vertex program example,
just to kind of look at it,
get some ideas of what it looks like,
what you're going to
see when James comes up.
I want to point out one thing here.
Again,
with the Jaguar seed that you have,
we have a fully
functional vertex program.
The syntax is slightly different from
what you see here because it was evolving
and we had to lock it down at some point.
The syntax you see here or something,
or whatever the arb decides on,
which will probably be almost
exactly what you see here,
will be in the final arb spec
and our shader builder tool,
which James will show you,
will be updated to reflect that.
So if we look at this,
this declares a vertex
program at the beginning,
normal in a position,
grabs an inverse transform
in the model view matrix,
grabs the model view projection matrix,
sets some program environment
variables for some different stuff,
from lighting angles, the half angle.
So obviously if you look at this and
you're familiar with lighting models,
you can see this is basically going
to do a lighting model for you.
There's a temporary declaration there,
and you can see it then declares
the output color and output result,
explicitly declaring everything
you need to operate on.
So you can look at that and say, okay,
here's my working set of stuff.
So here's what it does.
The beginning of it is pretty simple.
It's going to do a transform
and output the output positions.
It does some of the
lighting calculations.
And if you look at the end here,
you can see it finishes
out with output color x,
y, z, putting out the x, y,
and z parts of that output
color using the results of
its lighting calculation here,
and then ends.
So that's kind of what you're
looking at in vertex programs.
They're fairly low level, but again,
it's an efficient way of doing a lot
of the operations you want to do.
You don't have to worry about
300 or 400 state variables,
setting them up,
doing a whole bunch of work on the CPU.
You can write a vertex program in these
instructions to do really whatever you
want to do and ensure that you get the
most efficient operation out of it.
operation out of it.
What I haven't talked about and
I'll spend one slide on it is the
OpenGL interface to all of this.
Again, fairly simple.
You're going to generate a program
just like a text for generation.
You're going to bind to that
program to make it active.
One thing I don't have in here
is you'll enable the program.
The next thing you'll do is,
I want to read the program string.
Programs are just strings that you
can read directly into it as in the
program string arb function there.
That takes the entire
program string and parses it.
To set context parameters
that you may have seen,
the environment parameters,
that would be a way of doing that.
And then inside the begin end you
would do things like vertex attribute
4f and set whatever that vector is for
the attribute and then set a vertex.
Lastly, once you're done with the end,
let me back up a little bit.
Once you call the vertex, that vertex 3f,
that actually invokes the program.
That call is what says execute
this program on that vertex.
So you can actually think about it,
as soon as you call that,
whatever state you have at
that point is passing into
the vertex program as needed,
and that's going to be executed on.
Lastly,
when you're done with the programs,
please delete them and
clean up after yourself.
So, this brings us to Shader Builder.
Shader Builder is new for Jaguar.
It's a great tool.
It's a tool that allows
you to interactively debug
and build vertex programs.
And James McComb is going to come on up,
and he's going to show you
a demo of Shader Builder.
Come on up, James.
And he's going to take you through that.
Hi.
So, yes, today I'm going to tell you a
little bit about Shader Builder.
Basically what we noticed at
Apple whenever I was working on the
implementation of the vertex program
specification was a distinct lack
of tools for writing these shaders.
I mean, it's all very well.
Fire up Emacs, start writing a program,
save it, and then of course you've got to
make all the open-- you've got
to write like a GLAD application
or something and make all the
OpenGL calls to load in the shader.
And then enable it.
And there's a whole lot of
other work you have to do.
And this is just to like
test your shader once.
Then you might have little typos in it,
syntax errors.
Not to mention,
although there's a limited set of
opcodes you can use in these things,
they're quite-- the logic is a
little difficult to figure out.
And we thought, hey,
wouldn't it be really great to have
a system whereby we could just start
typing them and have things appear
in real time and people wouldn't even
have to create an OpenGL application
framework to start doing their stuff.
So that was the sort of birth of
the idea of Shader Builder and it's
been worked on now for some time.
So we believe it's a world class tool.
We don't think you'll see anything
like it on any other platform.
At the moment.
And we think it'll be very
helpful for you all to use.
So now I'm going to start
here and show you some of the
features of Shader Builder.
Here it is.
And I'll just identify the main
sort of areas in the user interface.
Basically you can see, this is,
I'm selecting it,
that is the vertex program right there.
That's currently being ran.
This is the OpenGL output rendering.
This area here, which I'm circling,
is the controls to allow you
to do interactive debugging
with Shader Builder.
Basically, I'll talk about it later,
but it basically allows you to do
step by step debugging using an
inbuilt software emulation we have.
We can step through and you can watch
the state of the hardware registers
and it's very useful for being able
to analyze the logic in your program.
Also, over here on the right,
which I can slide in and out,
we have a pop-out reference
with all the opcodes used in
the arb vertex program spec.
And as you select them,
you can see here the documentation.
This is taken straight
out of the white paper,
the documentation for all the opcodes.
top codes.
and of course I can double click any
of these and they will appear at the
current cursor position in the text.
Also here, if I just select that,
there's only one entry
there at the moment.
Arb Vertex Program.
It is our hope further down the
line as new shader languages appear,
like whenever the arb manages to
finalize fragment shader spec.
We'd like to be able to include
that in Shader Builder so you
could just literally go down here,
select arb fragment program,
if that's what it's called,
and the parser that is used to parse your
program will change to that and Shader
Builder's behavior will change somewhat
so that you can write fragment programs.
We just wanted to have a unified way
of being able to do this that was
clean and would save you a lot of time.
So now I'm going to explain
in a little more detail what
actually is going on right now.
You can see that there's like a
white circle being drawn here.
What's actually going on is
Shader Builder is submitting
a series of vertices to the
beginning of the OpenGL pipeline.
They comprise a sphere and this program
is replacing the transformation,
clipping,
and lighting part of the pipeline.
It is being run once for every
vertex going through and then the
rasterizer is picking up the output
vertices the program's emitting
and it is rendering them up here.
This is a very simple program.
In fact, this is the simplest vertex
program really you can have that
would be of any use to you at all.
Basically, these three lines,
they declare three variables
inside the program.
They basically bind to attributes
of the incoming vertex,
both the position, color,
and the incoming texture coordinate.
This line here binds to the vertex.
This line here binds to the model view
projection matrix inside of OpenGL.
It's a fairly straightforward syntax.
Remember, all the commodities are
four component vectors.
That's why I've got a bracket
four just like the C array syntax,
basically declaring a
four by four matrix.
These three lines right here,
they declare three more
variables which are bound to
the outgoing vertex structure.
And that's what I'm trying to fill out.
When I fill that out,
that is what the rasterizer will render.
These four lines perform
four dot products,
basically transforming the incoming
vertex position by the four rows inside
the model view projection matrix.
And they fill it out
into the output vertex.
And this right there is
a simple move operation.
I'm just moving the incoming vertex
color to the output and next line exactly
the same with the texture coordinate.
So it's simply, it's called pass through.
It's just a simple pass through.
If I select this button right here,
GL parameters,
this allows me to change some of the
attributes of the incoming vertices.
If I click on this color well right here,
basically of course there's a GL color 3F
call being made to set the color of all
the vertices that are being submitted.
By sliding this around,
of course I can change that.
And since it's passing it through,
you can see the white circle changing.
Of course also I have control over,
if I select this,
it allows me individual control of the
texture units on the graphics card.
And I can load textures and enable
and disable them individually.
So the next little thing
I'd like to show you is,
I'm going to start making some
changes to this program to make
things a little more interesting.
And also to show you one of
the really nicest things.
One of the really nicest
features of this tool.
What I'm going to do is,
I'm going to add another binding
to an incoming vertex attribute.
I'm going to bind to the
normal as it comes in.
So you're going to notice
something as I start typing here.
It's actually,
every time I press a character,
there's a thread going in the
background which is just constantly,
as I type, parsing the text and compiling
it and returning out the error
information from the parser as I type.
So you can see down at the bottom,
I'll just put the mouse on it,
it's giving me exact information
of what it thinks is wrong.
And it even gives you a hint
as to what the parser believes
is the erroneous token.
So I haven't finished typing,
so ATTR is highlighted in red.
So I'll just continue to type here.
I've created a binding to
the incoming vertex normal.
Now I want to be able to see
the normals of all the vertices.
I'm going to assign the incoming
vertex normal to the output color,
which will produce an interesting effect.
I'm going to go into the instruction
reference here on the right,
pick out the appropriate opcode,
double click it.
You can see it just
dropped it in there for me.
There are placeholders for what
variable names to use as the operands.
It's of course returning a
syntax error because those don't
match what's in my program.
I'm just going to fill
them out right now.
Remove this line here.
And as you can see,
it's updated just as I've been typing.
Now you can see the normals for all the
vertices are being mapped to the color.
So you can see this rainbow effect.
And you can see that Shader Builder
actually draws the axes here for
you so you can see what's going on.
That's just a basic example,
just to let you see that this
is occurring in real time.
I'm going to show you more
interesting shaders than this later,
but this is just sort of
an introduction to it.
I'm not going to show you the
debugger inside this tool to
allow you to analyze your logic.
So I'm going to close down
this shader right here.
And I'm going to bring up
the next one right here.
This is not a very graphically
interesting shader.
Indeed, so uninteresting that it draws
absolutely nothing in the output.
Because it binds to none of
the outgoing vertex attributes
and it writes no data in,
although all the vertices for
the sphere are going into OpenGL,
well, none of them are -- they're getting
stuck at the TCL part of the pipeline.
They're not being filled out.
But I have a different purpose
for showing you this shader.
It does declare three local variables,
sort of three temporaries.
I've named them A, B, and C.
I can create new ones
if I just type in here.
I just created a variable called hello.
You'll notice as I've been typing,
if you look at the identifier list,
over here on the right,
as I create new variables in real time,
it's actually recording
them here on the right.
The reason for this is for debugging.
So over here,
you'll see that the variable B has got
-- it's all four component vectors,
as I've told you.
And it's got one, two, three, four in it.
And C has just got two
in it on the X component.
I can just double-click
here and I can redefine.
I can change these.
I can change these and put in new values.
Just like that.
Now I'm going to start the debugger.
The controls are over here on the bottom.
If I click on the step button,
you can see down here at the bottom,
it's saying stepping through the program,
press reset to return to editing.
The source code is read-only, of course,
while I'm debugging.
And it grays it out.
And you can see that it has
highlighted the opcode that
it's about to execute in blue.
If I click the step button,
pretty straightforward stuff.
It's basically, as it said, move B to A.
And if you look in the identifier list,
the emulator returns information as
to what variables were touched upon
every cycle of the program counter.
And I can see that A has
just been touched and it's
highlighted in blue there.
So you can very quickly get
an idea of what each line of
code is touching and changing.
So I'm just continuing to
step through the program here.
You can see it all going through.
I can reset the emulator.
I can run it just all the way through
and see exactly what's going on.
Even if, say, I'm debugging,
I'm halfway through the program,
I can change the state of
any register at any time.
You can see here it's about
to execute a move operation.
I can change the value of A to
something else just as I'm debugging.
I don't need to reset and
change them when I'm starting.
I can do it in the middle of the program.
No problem.
So hopefully,
if you use your imaginations and you
do try writing some of these shaders,
which I hope you will,
I think you'll find yourself
using this quite regularly.
So the next feature I'd like to
show you is the ability... Okay,
you've written your shader.
You basically have a text file
written now with your shader in it,
and you want to be able to...
You want to be able to take that and
have a framework to start writing a
game with or doing something useful.
I mean you've got a text file,
that's not a lot of use.
You need some C files with all
the OpenGL entry points being
called to load your program in
and set it up appropriately.
Well, Shader Builder can help you
out substantially there to save
you a lot of reading basically.
I'm going to open up
another example right here.
This one right here.
It's basically a simple lighting model.
I'll show you what's up.
Let's just resize this so you can see
a little more clearly what's going on.
Rotate this around a little.
You can see it's a little car.
The lighting model,
it's absolutely really simple.
It's basically just doing a simple dot
product with all the vertex normals
with the light direction vector.
Then of course it's modulating the
incoming vertex color with that.
Meaning that if I go here and
I start changing the vertex color,
you can see it updates in real time.
[Transcript missing]
It doesn't seem to be working.
Oh well.
I don't know.
Anyway, it would export a project.
It would start a build process.
It would basically watch the build
log and it would then run the program.
It would hide Shader Builder
and run the program for you.
And you'd be able to open up
Project Builder and start working on it.
I'll look into that.
Anyway, moving on.
The next thing,
just to show you some slightly
more interesting shaders,
just to show you what you can
do with these vertex programs.
That was a very basic
lighting model I showed you.
Very similar to the one
implemented in OpenGL.
It is really,
the standard OpenGL lighting
model is pretty crude.
Here's one that I actually
wrote a couple of weeks ago,
which I'll open up.
It's, where is it here?
This one right here.
[Transcript missing]
Okay.
Oh, there's a W component.
Pardon me.
And...
[Transcript missing]
Thanks.
So, just any other things
I'd like to show here.
I'll show one more shader and
then I'll be heading over again.
This one is a, hang on a second.
This is an implementation
of a cell shader.
It makes use of texture
maps quite extensively.
If I go in here,
you can see that texture unit
one is being loaded up with
a one-dimensional texture,
making up ramps of color.
Actually, about four ramps of color.
What's actually being done is
the vertex program is setting
the texture coordinates to look
up within that texture to be
able to create a ramped effect.
There's another texture right here,
which is actually two pixels
wide and one pixel tall.
It's just a black pixel
and a white pixel.
It's used for doing edge detection.
It looks like someone's went around
the model with a black marker.
I'll use the car, but I don't know if
you can really see it.
On the sphere,
it actually looks like there's
a black surround on it,
and it looks like it's got
a quantized look on it.
If I rotate the model of the car,
you can see the
cell-sheeted effect it has.
That's just being done in one vertex.
There's no performance
hit for doing this,
because it's all running on the hardware,
if you have the hardware.
The important thing to note
here is that we do have a highly
optimized emulator running inside
our standard OpenGL implementation.
Even on your old measly
PowerBook with its Rage 1 to 8,
you can still go ahead and you
can write these parameters.
The performance will be a little slower,
but it's actually very usable.
I write shaders all the
time on my PowerBook,
and it's really no problem.
ShaderBuilder is on the Jaguar Seed
CD that was given out to you guys.
Take it home.
The example programs that
I've been working with are
on the sample code website,
which I believe there will be a
reference given to that at the end
of the talk when I head back to Jeff.
Go download the shaders,
play around with it.
I guarantee you will not need
any prior knowledge of this
stuff to actually figure it out.
It's incredibly easy to learn.
Go ahead, play around,
and get experimenting and start
using these things in your games.
I'm going to hand back over to
Jeff here to carry on the show.
Thanks, guys.
I think the folks here who have
used vertex shaders before and
know the kind of write a text file,
write a C program, load it in,
what do I get?
Nothing.
Go back.
Edit the text file, load it in,
what do I get?
Nothing.
And go through this.
When you're trying to
learn a new technology,
this kind of tool is great.
I mean, a small brain like me,
I can sit down and fool around
with it and actually kind
of come up with something.
You guys, I'm sure,
can experiment and really build great
shaders that you can use in your
applications for real world things.
You can really manipulate
the graphics pipeline in an
interactive way for the first time.
And this tool is not
available anywhere else.
And as James mentioned,
one thing we're looking at is the
instructions and the supported languages.
Right now, our vertex program.
We're looking to expand
that to the other ARB specs.
And even non-ARB specs.
We're looking to whatever we can put
in that we can put as a text language,
as a parser,
and give you an interactive environment
to debug and work with these things
to really multiply your productivity.
So you're not spending days trying
to debug small things so you
can step through and find that
small error in your math code.
I'm sure we all wish we could go
back and spend more time in our
math classes in college so we can,
you know, so you guys who are in college,
listen to the math classes.
But this stuff gets hard and when
you have a debugger like this,
it really helps out.
Let me go back to the software.
slides.
and we'll move on and talk a little
bit about texture and fragment shaders.
What I want to do here is not
really cover in the in-depth that
I covered in vertex shader and
texture and fragment shaders,
but give you an idea of what they are,
what part of the pipeline they control,
and how you can,
what effects they can do and how you
can use them in your applications.
First, that first bullet there
really explains what they are.
It's a per fragment,
texture address lookup and
multi-texture combined.
So let's break that down.
What that means is,
you take that texture coordinate in,
and the simplest case of something
is to take the texture coordinate,
use that to directly
index into a texture,
take the value of the text at that point,
and output it directly
as the fragment color.
Well, that's okay,
I mean that's standard texturing,
but there's a lot of
other things you can do.
Bump mapping, you can do the shininess,
the specular reflections,
all these are things you can do
in a texture and fragment program.
What you do is you manipulate the way
you're looking up into textures and the
way you're combining those together.
So first you need to
determine a texture address.
You need to go to the texture
and look up that value,
and then you need to combine
those multi-texture lookups
into a fragment color.
Or use multiple texture lookups
that depend on one another.
Look up a value out of one texture
that you're going to use to look up
into another texture that allows you to
actually get some really cool effects.
Simple thing here is what do you output?
You output a fragment color.
That's basically it.
All this program,
whatever you want to do there,
is outputting a fragment color.
So this is basically
what I was talking about.
You have texture coordinates
and vertex colors coming in.
You do a texture lookup and
you get a color fragment out.
That box is what you're going to
actually be programming when you
look at texture and fragment shaders.
So, why isn't this a single extension?
Well, first thing is lower down
the pipeline and the hardware
that the two main vendors,
ATI and NVIDIA have are significantly
different in the kind of their
functionality and how they work.
And they're progressing very rapidly,
even more rapidly than the
vertex programming area.
So we really haven't come to the
maturity that allows us to bring a
single extension to encompass the
functionality in both sets of hardware.
So what we have is,
NVIDIA's side we have texture
shader and register combiners.
On the texture shader side,
I need a drink of water, I need a shader.
Textures Shader actually does the address
lookups and the register combiners,
as you would think,
combines the various textures
into the final fragment color.
Fragment Shader encompasses all of this.
It's a little bit newer of an
extension and will actually take
this entire operation and put it
into one kind of unified command set.
Let's look at all three of these.
First,
Texture Shaders are new for Jaguar.
We hadn't had them before.
Texture Shader 1,
2 and 3 are supported in Jaguar.
And they provide, again,
texture address lookup in a
various set of shader stages.
There are three extensions and
they provide 37 canned operations.
You can combine these in a lot
of different ways and get a
very powerful shader program.
Some of the things you can do,
for example,
they have conventional texture lookups.
So the simplest shader may be a 2D
texture lookup that's exactly getting
the textal at your texture coordinate
and returning that as the fragment
color or using that into the combiner
stage to get the fragment color.
But then you have special cases.
You could do nothing or you
could just pass a value through.
Or you could actually
color fragments and say,
"Hey, we don't need to draw that fragment
for some conditional." Then you
can do dependent texture reads,
which I talked about a little bit.
And it's really critical for
things like the recolorization
you saw in the keynote,
the background color removal.
That's using a dependent texture
read to actually do a color
correction there and remove that
color and change an alpha value.
Then the last thing you do in a lot
of the reflection and bump mapping
algorithms is to do a color correction.
And you can do that with the dot
product dependent texture reads,
which also put the dot product
into that kind of formula of how
do you configure the shaders.
Moving on to register combiners.
Register combiners is really an
extremely configurable fragment coloring.
It's not, again,
not a programming language,
but it gives you a kind of a box that
you can configure in different ways
to replace the texture environment
control like textureenvadd,
textureenvcombine,
the fogging and the color sum operations.
The key here is you go from a linear one,
if anyone's looked at doing
some of the textureenv stuff,
you're pretty limited in
a couple texture units.
The output of one texture unit needs
to go into the other texture unit.
Only the first texture unit
has access to the color.
All those things are very limiting,
especially if you're trying to
do special effects with this.
So what this allows you to do
is having all texture units
have access to the color,
non-linearly combining these
texture units to get a final output.
So it really helps in doing things
when you have to do multiple levels
of combining and multiple levels of
coloring onto your texture units.
The second extension,
there's two extensions.
The second one adds additional color.
Flexibility, for example,
if you're trying to solve the
problem of doing planar textures,
red, green, and blue,
in separate areas and you want
to combine those together,
having that separate color is
really good because you can colorize
each texture unit and then combine
them together in a final step.
Both of these extensions,
or all five of these,
register combiners two,
texture shaders three,
are NVIDIA specific.
ATI has brought along fragment shader.
Fragment shader basically brings
a unified instruction set.
It's still in development right now.
We're targeting it for Jaguar.
It controls both the texture
address lookup for texture
shader and the color data,
which is the register combiner set,
into one overarching extension here.
is similar to our vertex
program in its layout.
So I'll show you an example of it.
Really, it's very preliminary,
but it gives you an idea that you'll be
able to use a tool like Shader Builder
to edit a language very similar to
what you've been working with with
a vertex program when this is complete.
This is on ATI Radeon
8500 and later processors.
So I'm not going to really go
through the functionality here,
but I just wanted to give you kind of
a sneak peek at what it's looking like,
what kind of things we can see here.
This is a bumped cubic
environment map shader.
So this is the operations you need
to do to do a cubic environment map
that's also bump mapped on an object.
First we're going to do some routing
instructions to basically tell which
texture coordinate variables are
mapped to which texture coordinates.
Pretty simple here.
Then we're going to do
some color dot products.
This is similar to what you saw with
a vertex program where you're going
to do a dot product and you're going
to use the texture coordinates to,
which source texture coordinates and
any kind of operations or swizzles or,
you can see it says mod 2x down there,
any modifications to those texture
units as they come in so you can
do those in a programmatic way.
Then you're going to do some
of the i-spaced lookups.
This is something you would,
it looks like a lighting calculation,
a bump map calculation
that's very similar.
Moving on, you have a dependent texture
read where you're reading out of
a previous texture coordinate,
using a texture map,
a texture coordinate,
reading into a texture map and pulling
it back out and using it later.
And then at the end,
you're going to see that the final
step here is it moves the texture
coordinate zero into the result there.
And that's the output.
Again, these kind of pixel programs,
fragment shaders, what you will,
have the color as the output.
So in the end, what you're outputting
is that fragment color,
pretty simple.
So let me bring up one more demo.
Let me bring up demo machine number two.
This is NVIDIA's launch demo
for the GeForce 4 Titanium.
It's an interesting demo in the
fact that it does a lot of things.
You can see there's bump
mapping in the facial area.
You have self-shadowing.
You have the fur.
You can see the bump mapping here.
[Transcript missing]
Extremely impressive demo
from NVIDIA showing the
power of these shaders.
How many shells are there, Geoff?
There's eight.
Why don't we leave the Wolfman
up over here and go back to
slides on the right side,
please.
The Wolfman demo,
I was going to go through a little
bit about how it's built and
what it does in a minute or two.
But instead what we
decided to do is give you,
in our advanced 3D coming up,
we're going to take you through
the actual how that was built,
how the shaders were used,
what the technologies are.
It might be a really good session
to go to because you really can
see some of the advanced things
you can do with shadow volumes,
with the fur rendering,
with the bones and how to do
the bone structure on that.
So I really recommend you go to
that and you'll see exactly how
the Wolfman was put together.
We've talked about a lot of stuff
here today and I don't really think
that you can take away from this
session and actually get every
nuance of vertex programming or
obviously of pixel or texture shaders.
So what I recommend you do is when
the arb is complete with the spec,
which should be very shortly,
you get the spec.
It's a large body of work
but if you read through it,
it's fairly straightforward and
you can use the information you
have here today and you can look
through it and get the nuances of it.
Take shader builder,
start working with shader builder,
build some shaders,
understand what the vertex
shaders can and can't do and
put those in your programs.
And finally the ATI and NVIDIA websites
have a wealth of information on
their extensions and on vertex and
pixel programmability in general.
Some other online sources
are theopengl.org,
always a good place for reference.
Liz.apple.com,
if you're not on the Mac OpenGL list,
I recommend you join that list.
We're on that list, we pay attention.
While we may not be able to
respond to every single question,
we'll try and give you good
information that you may need.
And lastly, developer.apple.com/opengl.
So, we've talked about
programmability in general,
talked about vertex programs.
James gave you a great demo of the
shader builder which is on your seed CD.
We're looking to continue
moving that forward.
Any suggestions you have,
send them on in.
We'll try and put those
into our products.
And we finished up with
texture and fragment shaders.
Let's talk a little
bit about the roadmap.
We're at the third line down here,
so we're at the graphics programmability.
Tomorrow morning,
Integrated Graphics 1 talks about
integrating the OS and OpenGL together.
Followed by Integrated Graphics 2,
which is like the
supercharged version of that.
What are some great optimizations,
some great things you can do
combining the power of Mac OS X,
the Jaguar and OpenGL.
Colors and Conditional Media.
There's some game solutions which
some will incorporate OpenGL.
Some will have some great solutions
to event handling and some other
problems that everyone runs into
whether you're a game or not a game.
Again, game solutions follows with
some network solutions.
Followed by that,
Advanced 3D on Thursday at 3:30 and
that's going to talk about how we built
Wolfman and some other surprise demos
that we're going to show that show
some really advanced 3D techniques.
Followed by OpenGL Performance and
Optimization.
If you need to go,
if you're doing OpenGL,
go to that session.
It's a great,
talks about some more tools we have,
talks about some great performance
optimization things and it really
is a great session to go to,
great things coming out of it.
Graphics tuning for graphics
in general and then followed at
the end by the feedback forum.
Contact Sergio's information,
sergio@apple.com.
And let's move into Q&A.